# Lesson 1: Compiling and Linking

---

### Table of contents:
- [TLDR](#tldr)
- [Intro](#intro)
- [New files](#files)
	- [Scripts](#scripts)
		- [.gdbinit.tmpl-riscv](#gdbinittmpl-riscv)
		- [.gdbinit.tmpl-riscv-driver](#gdbinittmpl-riscv-driver)
		- [kernel.ld](#kernelld)
	- [Src](#src)
		- [entry.S](#entrys)
		- [uart.S](#uarts)
	- [Makefile](#makefile)
- [Instructions](#instructions)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [Extra reading](#extra-reading)

---

### TLDR:
- Goal: Learn about assemblers and linkers
- Expected time to complete: 4 hours
- Prerequisites:
	- RISCV Assembly
	- GAS
	- Ld

---
	
### Intro
This assignment is designed to help students get familiar with RISCV assembly and the role of linkers in creating an executable.

The lesson should have covered the basics of RISCV assembly, the syntax of linker scripts, and the layout of UART memory mapped IO. This assignment aims to help the students cement their knowledge through hands-on experience by building a (somewhat) recognizeable command line that will become the basis of `umass-os`.

They will be tasked with implementing all of the routines necessary to write output to the UART, exposing all labels to the linker and creating a space for the stack with the linker script. When the assignment is done the student should be able to boot into a very simple command line that echoes input back to the user and "executes" user commands by returning the last typed character when they hit enter.

After this assignment students will be able to write and read RISCV unprivileged assembly, understand linker scripts, use a memory mapped UART, and compile a RISCV program.

It is expected that students will have to look up RISCV assembly mnemonics and how to use UART registers. Both of these are well documented and resources for both are linked below under [Files](#files).

---

### Files:
- <a id=scripts></a>`scripts`: Scripts we will use to develop `umass-os`.
	- <a id=gdbinittmpl-riscv></a>`.gdbinit.tmpl-riscv`: Template for a gdbinit script that enables a few helpful features and sets what port to connect to the qemu gdb server on. Gdb scripts contain gdb commands that are run one after the other when gdb is run. 
	- <a id=gdbinittmpl-riscv-driver></a>`.gdbinit.tmpl-riscv-driver`: Another gdb script that prevents pwndbg from dereferencing any values that look like pointers. This may be useful for this assignment and any others with memory mapped IO because reading the value at a memory mapped register often changes the value at that location.
	- <a id=kernelld></a>`kernel.ld`: Simple linker script that sets up `entry` as the entry point of `umass-os`. Students will need to edit it to make space for the stack.
- <a id=src></a>`src`: Source code for `umass-os`.
	- <a id=entrys></a>`entry.S`: Entry point for `umass-os`, sets up the UART and then runs a simple command prompt.
	- <a id=uarts></a>`uart.S`: Subroutines for handling UART IO.

---

### Instructions
1. Edit `kernel.ld` to `PROVIDE` a 4096 byte stack for our entry point code. Remember that the RISCV stack must be 16 byte aligned.
2. Review the code in `uart.S` and the UART memory [map layout](http://byterunner.com/16550.html). Then implement all of the `/* TODO */`s to create a function that takes one parameter in `a0` and prints it to the screen.
3. Once that is done, expose public symbols for uart_init, uart_read, uart_write, and uart_print_prompt to the linker. 
4. Run `make docker-run` to boot into your new OS. Beware that if the compilation or linking step fails then the `make qemu-gdb` command will exit early and you will only see the gdb pane. If this happens try running `make qemu-gdb` from your host's command line to see where it is failing.

---

### Resources:
- [RISCV unprivileged ISA](../../../references/riscv/riscv-spec-20191213.pdf)
- [UART reference](http://byterunner.com/16550.html)
- [GNU assembler reference](https://ftp.gnu.org/old-gnu/Manuals/gas-2.9.1/html_node/as_toc.html)
- [GNU linker reference](https://ftp.gnu.org/old-gnu/Manuals/ld-2.9.1/html_chapter/ld_toc.html)

---

### Extra reading:
- [Additional UART reading](https://www.qemu.org/docs/master/system/invocation.html)
