# Lesson 2: Jumping to C

---

### Table of contents:
- [TLDR](#tldr)
- [Intro](#intro)
- [New files](#new-files)
	- [Include](#include)
	- [Src](#src)
		- [main.c](#mainc)
		- [start.c](#startc)
        - [uart.c](#uartc)
        - [util.c](#utilc)
- [Instructions](#instructions)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [Extra reading](#extra-reading)

---

### TLDR:
- Goal: Learn about c compilation and make a recognizable command line
- Expected time to complete: 3 hours
- Prerequisites:
	- Make

---
	
### Intro
This assignment is designed to help students understand why programmers write in 'high level' languages like C and how assembly code can interact with higher level programs. It also demonstrates how to use Makefiles to simplify the build process.

The lesson should have covered what symbols are in a linking context and how to make symbols visible to other compilation units. The lesson should also have covered Makefile syntax. This assignment aims to help the students cement their knowledge through hands-on experience by improving on the command line they built last time.

They will be tasked with rewriting their assembly command prompt in C and then improving it so that it can process full strings instead of single characters and will implement one command of their choice. Once that is complete they will have to edit the Makefile by hand to get their OS to compile. When the assignment is done the student should be able to boot into a very simple command line that echoes input back to the user and prints output or an error message when a command is executed.

After this assignment students will be able to explain the benefits and drawbacks of using higher level languages. They will also be able to create Makefiles to automate compilation.

---

### New files:
- <a id=include></a>`include`: Include files for C compilation. This will be part of the core file structure we use for development. `X.h` should always be the header file for `X.c`.
- <a id=src></a>`src`: Source files for C compilation. This will be part of the core file structure we use for development. All definitions associated with `X.c` or `X.h` should be prefixed with `X_`. For an example look at the functions in `util.c`.
	- <a id=mainc></a>`main.c`: Functions for the command prompt.
	- <a id=startc></a>`start.c`: Calls all necessary initialization functions before startig the command prompt.
	- <a id=uartc></a>`uart.c`: Helper functions for using the UART.
	- <a id=utilc></a>`util.c`: Miscellaneous helper functions.

---

### Instructions:
1. Rewrite all the function in `uart.S` in C. Rename the file to `uart.c`. Don't use any magic numbers for addresses. All the values you need are included in `uart.h` as macros.
2. In `main.c` implement the main function. It should print a prompt (e.g. `>>`) then read user input (while echoing it back to the screen) into a suitably sized buffer (>= 16 bytes). When it receives a newline character it should 'execute' the command by either printing output to the screen or an error message saying the command was not recognized, e.g.`The command 'wasd' was not recognized.` There must be at least one implemented command, the output can be anything you want. You must also implement the delete key. It should behave as expected. Removing characters from the screen, going back one step, and only deleting user supplied characters (not the prompt).
3. Finally rewrite `entry.S` to jump to start right after it loads the stack pointer into `sp`.
4. When you are done you should be able to run `make docker-run`, run `continue` in `pwndbg`, and then interact with your command prompt.

---

### Resources:
- [Make documentation](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html)

---

### Extra reading:
