# Lesson 3: Using interrupts

---

### Table of contents:
- [TLDR](#tldr)
- [Intro](#intro)
- [New files](#new-files)
	- [Include](#include)
		- [memlayout.h](#memlayouth)
		- [riscv.h](#riscvh)
		- [types.h](#typesh)
	- [Src](#src)
		- [machinevec.S](#machinevecs)
        - [plic.c](#plicc)
        - [trap.c](#trapc)
- [Instructions](#instructions)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [Extra reading](#extra-reading)

---

### TLDR:
- Goal: Learn about the PLIC and implement hardware interrupts
- Expected time to complete: 6 hours
- Prerequisites:
	- PLIC
	- RISCV privieged architecture
	- RISCV CSRs

---
	
### Intro
This assignment is designed to help students understand how interrupt based IO is implemented and why it is useful.

The lesson should have covered what interrupt based IO is and how it is implemented in RISCV. This assignment aims to help the students cement their knowledge through hands-on experience by adapting the command line they built last time to use interrupts instead of polling. The benefits should be visible in their laptop's battery life tooltip, this new version of the OS uses much less power.

They will be tasked with enabling harware interrupts on the CPU and rewriting their polling based command prompt to use those interrupts. When the assignment is done the student should be able to boot into a command line that functions exactly the same as the oen they made in the last assignment, while under the hood it is using interrupts.

After this assignment students will be able to explain the benefits of interrupt based IO and how it is implemented in hardware.

---

### New files:
- <a id=include></a>`include`: In addition to the standard header files I added the below headers with macro definitions.
	- <a id=memlayouth></a>`memlayout.h`: Macros for the memory layout of the `virt` board we're running `umass-os` on.
	- <a id=riscvh></a>`riscv.h`: Helper functions and macros for various RISCV tasks.
	- <a id=typesh></a>`types.h`: Helpful typedefs for common RISCV types.
- <a id=src></a>`src`: In addition to changes to `main.c`, `uart.c`, and `start.c` there are the following new files.
	- <a id=machinevecs></a>`machinevec.S`: Trap vector to handle  interrupts in machine mode.
	- <a id=plicc></a>`plic.c`: Helper functions for using the PLIC.
	- <a id=trapc></a>`trap.c`: Functions to set up and process interrupts in machine mode.

---

### Instructions:
1. Review the register layout for the RISCV PLIC and then implement the functions found in `plic.c`.

---

### Resources:
- [RISCV privileged ISA](../../../references/riscv/riscv-privileged-20211203.pdf)
- [RISCV PLIC documentation](../../../references/riscv/riscv-plic-1.0.0.pdf)

---

### Extra reading:
