# Lesson 4: Implementing machine mode processes

---

### Table of contents:
- [TLDR](#tldr)
- [Intro](#intro)
- [New files](#new-files)
	- [Include](#include)
		- [parameters.h](#parametersh)
	- [Src](#src)
		- [proc.c](#procc)
        - [switch.S](#switchs)
- [Instructions](#instructions)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [Extra reading](#extra-reading)

---

### TLDR:
- Goal: Learn about the CLIC/ACLINT and implement preemptive multitasking
- Expected time to complete: 6 hours
- Prerequisites:
	- ACLINT
	- Linker script defined symbols

---
	
### Intro
This assignment is designed to help students understand why programmers write in 'high level' languages like C and how assembly code can interact with higher level programs. It also demonstrates how to use Makefiles to simplify the build process.

The lesson should have covered what symbols are in a linking context and how to make symbols visible to other compilation units. The lesson should also have covered Makefile syntax. This assignment aims to help the students cement their knowledge through hands-on experience by improving on the command line they built last time.

They will be tasked with rewriting their assembly command prompt in C and then improving it so that it can process full strings instead of single characters and will implement one command of their choice. Once that is complete they will have to edit the Makefile by hand to get their OS to compile. When the assignment is done the student should be able to boot into a very simple command line that echoes input back to the user and prints output or an error message when a command is executed.

After this assignment students will be able to explain the benefits and drawbacks of using higher level languages. They will also be able to create Makefiles to automate compilation.

---

### New files:
- <a id=include></a>`include`: In addition to the standard header files I added the below headers with macro definitions.
	- <a id=parametersh></a>`parameters.h`: Macros for various parameters that can be tweaked to change performance of the OS. Currently only contains `PARAMETERS_INTERRUPT_INTERVAL` which sets the number of CPU cycles per interrupt.
- <a id=src></a>`src`: In addition to changes to `start.c` and `trap.c` there are the following new files.
	- <a id=procc></a>`proc.c`: Functions for intializing and scheduling processes.
	- <a id=switchs></a>`switch.S`: Routine for switching to and from a process.

---

### Instructions:
1. 

---

### Resources:
- [RISCV ACLINT documentation](../../../references/riscv/riscv-aclint-1.0-20220110.pdf)
- [RISCV ABI](../../../references/riscv/riscv-abi.pdf)
- [Accessing linker script symbols in C](https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/ld/Source-Code-Reference.html)

---

### Extra reading:
